JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: from
torture to
banning Muslims.
At his confirmation hearing to
be the next
attorney general, Senator Jeff
Sessions lays
out legal limits to
president-elect Trump's
campaign statements.
Then, our series The Obama Years
continues
with a look at the president's
legacy on criminal
justice.
And how integrating arts in the
classroom
helps turn around poorly
performing schools.
ALFRE WOODARD, Actress: Art
completes not
only the education, but it
completes the human
being, our ability to create,
and to express
that creation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's opening day
of confirmation
season for team Trump.
And Senator Jeff Sessions, the
nominee for
attorney general, was leadoff
man.
He went before colleagues on the
Senate Judiciary
Committee, defending his views
on race and
civil rights and, at times,
separating himself
from the man who chose him.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: Alabama Senator
Jeff Sessions
walked into his hearing to some
as a longtime,
accomplished senator unfairly
accused of prejudice,
to others, as an extreme
conservative who
stokes racial divide.
In his opening remarks, the
attorney general
hopeful laid out his theme to
both sides,
saying he would put the law
above his own
views.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS (R-AL), Attorney
General Nominee:
I have always loved the law.
It is the very foundation of our
great country.
It's the exceptional foundation
of America.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Sessions'
politics and
view of the law have sparked
furious opposition.
In 1986, accusations of racially
insensitive
remarks and actions led the
Senate to reject
him for a federal judgeship.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: And the
committee has received letters
of opposition
from 400 different civil rights
organizations,
1,400 law professors.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, ranking
Democrat California's
Dianne Feinstein opened by
pointing to fears
that Sessions wouldn't enforce
laws fairly
to all.
Sessions insisted the
accusations were all
false.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: This caricature
of me in 1986
was not correct.
I have become United States
attorney.
I supported, as the civil rights
attorney
said, major civil rights cases
in my districts.
LISA DESJARDINS: The hearing was
interrupted
regularly by protesters raising
an array of
concerns, from civil rights to
immigration
to marijuana policy.
Committee Democrats like largely
withheld
fire today, instead focusing on
questions
about major issues like
abortion.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN: You have
referred to Roe
vs. Wade as -- quote -- "one of
the worst,
colossally erroneous Supreme
Court decisions
of all time" -- end quote.
Is that still your view?
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: It is.
It is law of the land.
It has been so established and
settled for
quite a long time.
And it deserves respect, and I
would respect
it and follow it.
LISA DESJARDINS: This was
Sessions' refrain:
His view hasn't changed; his job
would.
Similarly, on same-sex marriage.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: The five justices
on the Supreme
Court, a majority of the court,
has established
the definition of marriage for
the entire
United States of America.
And I will follow that decision.
LISA DESJARDINS: And on
water-boarding.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: Congress has
taken an action
now that makes it absolutely
improper and
illegal to use water-boarding or
any form
of torture in the United States
by our military
and by all other departments and
agencies.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was on
immigration, an
issue where Sessions will have
tremendous
power, that he took a staunch
stand.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: I do believe that
if you continually
go through a cycle of amnesty,
that you undermine
the respect for the law and
encourage more
illegal immigration into
America.
I believe the American people
spoke clearly
in this election.
I believe they agreed with my
basic view.
LISA DESJARDINS: One question
was asked by
both parties: How would Sessions
handle any
cases involving president-elect
Trump and
his family?
Sessions insisted he would
resign, rather
than do something unlawful.
Later, Democratic Senator
Sheldon Whitehouse
asked about Russia.
SEN.
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D), Rhode
Island: Will
the Department of Justice and
the FBI under
your administration be allowed
to continue
to investigate the Russian
connection, even
if it leads to the Trump camp
and Trump interests
and associates?
LISA DESJARDINS: Sessions didn't
answer directly,
and brought up another country.
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: If there are laws
violated
and they can be prosecuted, then
of course
you will have to handle that in
an appropriate
way.
I would say that the problem may
turn out
to be, as in the Chinese hacking
of hundreds
of thousands of maybe millions,
of records,
it has to be handled at a
political level.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sessions told
the committee
he would recuse himself on cases
involving
Hillary Clinton's e-mail, but
asked if he'd
recuse himself from any Trump
investigations?
SEN.
JEFF SESSIONS: I would review it
and try to
do the right thing as to whether
or not it
should stay within the
jurisdiction of the
attorney general or not.
LISA DESJARDINS: And we may see
more drama
and strong words tomorrow.
That's when there will be
witnesses for and
against Mr. Sessions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, thanks,
along with other
nominee confirmations.
So, Lisa, separately today, the
president-elect
told The New York Times in an
interview that
he wants Republicans in Congress
to replace
Obamacare, the Affordable Care
Act, at the
same time or very shortly after
they repeal
it.
How does that square with what
Republicans
are thinking and planning to do?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's
certainly been the
other big headline on Capitol
Hill today.
It is at odds with the direction
Republicans
had been going in.
Right now, the repeal itself
seems likely
to happen some time perhaps by
the end of
January, at its fastest, and
replacement,
Republicans haven't agreed on a
timeline for
that, some of them looking at
even maybe this
summer.
But now we have had word from
the House Republican
Speaker Paul Ryan today, saying
he hopes to
add in some concurrent elements
of the replace
as they repeal.
I think, all in all, Judy, this
is sort of
the longtime Republican leaders
in Congress
coming, perhaps clashing with to
some degree
the new Republican president to
be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just quickly,
Lisa, this
could mean a delay in the repeal
vote?
LISA DESJARDINS: No, I don't
think so, but
I think what it means, it will
be very difficult
to meet Donald Trump's timeline
of an immediate
repeal.
The repeal itself is probably
still weeks
away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins
at the Capitol,
thank you.
In the day's other news: A
federal jury sentenced
Dylann Roof to death for killing
nine black
worshipers at a church in
Charleston, South
Carolina.
The white supremacist
represented himself,
but he presented no case and
didn't ask the
jury to spare his life.
Afterward, one man whose sister
was killed
called the verdict a hollow
victory.
MELVIN GRAHAM, Brother of
Victim: My sister
is still gone.
I wish that this verdict could
have brought
her back, but it can't.
But what it can do is just send
a message
to those who feel the way he
feels that this
community will not tolerate it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Roof is the first
person sentenced
to die for a federal hate crime.
He still faces murder charges in
state court.
President Obama is back home
tonight in Chicago
for his farewell address to the
nation.
He is expected to reflect on his
eight years
in office before an audience of
thousands
of supporters.
In a Facebook post today, he
previewed his
message, saying -- quote -- "We
have reaffirmed
the belief that we can make a
difference with
our own hands, in our own time."
PBS will have special live
coverage of the
president's speech later
tonight.
The man in line to be the next
secretary of
homeland security says building
barriers along
the Mexican border is not
enough.
Retired Marine General John F.
Kelly had his
Senate confirmation hearing
today.
Among the questions: What about
president-elect
Trump's promise to build a
border wall?
GEN.
JOHN KELLY (RET.), Homeland
Security Secretary
Nominee: Certainly, as a
military person that
understands defense and
defenses, a physical
barrier, in and of itself, will
not do the
job.
It has to be, really, a layered
defense.
If you were to build a wall from
the Pacific
to the Gulf of Mexico, you would
still have
to back that wall up with
patrolling by human
beings, by sensors, by
observation devices.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kelly also said
he doesn't
support the idea of a registry
for Muslims
or for other religious groups.
In Afghanistan, nearly 40 people
died today
in a pair of bombings that
rocked Kabul.
The Taliban claimed
responsibility.
The blasts erupted near the
Afghan parliament
complex during evening rush
hour.
In addition to the dead, more
than 70 others
were wounded.
Thousands of people in Northern
California
remain under evacuation orders
tonight, as
heavy rain and snow roll over
the region.
Even police vehicles got stuck
in the Sierra
Nevada Mountains, where up to 10
feet of snow
was falling, and even ski
resorts had to shut
down.
Elsewhere, flooding in Sonoma
County is now
the worst in a decade, forcing
officials to
open a Sacramento dam for the
first time since
2005.
Wall Street mostly marked time
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
32 points to close at 19855.
The Nasdaq rose 20 points, and
the S&P 500
was unchanged.
And the newly crowned champions
of college
football are back home in
Clemson, South Carolina,
tonight, after an epic victory
over Alabama.
The Tigers scored last night
with one second
left on the clock to win 35 to
31.
It was a rematch of last year's
title game,
when Alabama won.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
U.S. intelligence
chiefs lay out the case of
Russian hacking;
Iran mourns the loss of an
influential moderate
voice; President Obama's efforts
to reform
the nation's criminal justice
system; and
much more.
The nation's top intelligence
officials appeared
before the Senate Intelligence
Committee today,
just days after the release of a
report on
the alleged role of Russian
influence during
the 2016 election and intrusion
into both
Democratic and Republican
networks.
Margaret Warner reports.
SEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia: Now,
in any of
your careers, have you ever seen
this level
of Russian interference in our
political process?
And we will start with Director
Comey, and
just go down the line.
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: No.
MAN: I have not.
MAN: No.
MARGARET WARNER: It was a
unified response
from America's top intelligence
officers in
their first public appearance
since releasing
an unclassified report
describing a coordinated
Russian effort to disrupt the
2016 presidential
election.
The report released Friday
determined with
-- quote -- "high confidence"
that Russian
President Vladimir Putin ordered
the hack
of American political
organizations, focused
on Democrats, that it was
designed to aid
president-elect Donald Trump and
discredit
his Democratic rival, Hillary
Clinton, and
that stolen information was then
delivered
to WikiLeaks, and other groups,
which published
it online.
The report stopped short of
providing the
evidence underlying those
judgments.
That remained the case today,
with Director
of National Intelligence James
Clapper saying,
to disclose more would
jeopardize sources.
JAMES CLAPPER, National
Intelligence Director:
We are very dependent on --
given the nature
of intelligence work to start
with you, very
dependent on you, as our
overseers, to look
at that yourselves on behalf of
the electorate.
MARGARET WARNER: Committee
chair, Senator
Richard Burr, also said he would
investigate
leaks to the media about the
report in advance
of its release.
FBI Director James Comey
declined to say if
there is an investigation into
whether the
Russian government communicated
with anyone
in the Trump team.
That raised eyebrows with some
members.
JAMES COMEY: In a public forum,
we never confirm
or deny a pending investigation.
SEN.
ANGUS KING (I), Maine: The irony
of your making
that statement here, I cannot
avoid, but I
will move on.
JAMES COMEY: Well, we sometimes
think differently
about closed investigations.
But you asked me if I had any
pending investigations,
and we're not going to talk
about that.
MARGARET WARNER: That was a
veiled reference
to Comey's decision to speak
publicly before
the election about the FBI's
investigation
into Hillary Clinton's private
e-mail server.
Also at question, whether the
hacks altered
the outcome of the election.
The Trump team has characterized
the report
as saying the hacking had no
effect on the
election results.
But, in fact, the report
explicitly said it
made no judgment on that.
It did say there is no evidence
that voting
machinery or counting was
affected.
CIA Director John Brennan also
said he had
recently discussed the hacking
with his Russian
counterpart.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director: And
told him clearly
that if Russia was doing this,
they're playing
with fire.
He denied any type of activity
along these
lines, but I made it very clear
to him that,
basically, we're onto them.
MARGARET WARNER: Separately, a
group of 10
senators from both parties
introduced legislation
seeking to broaden sanctions on
Russia.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This morning, I
sat down with
outgoing Secretary of State John
Kerry at
the U.S. Institute of Peace.
He was one of many Obama
administration officials
participating in an event called
Passing the
Baton, focused on a smooth
transition between
administrations.
I began by asking him just how
smoothly the
transition to the Trump team is
going.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: Well,
it's going pretty smoothly
because there's
not an enormous amount of it.
There are some people that have
been in the
building for a period of time.
But, you know, quite candidly, I
think there
has not been a lot of high-level
exchange
at this point in time.
I'm still expecting to meet with
my successor
at some point in the near term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You haven't met
with him yet?
JOHN KERRY: No, I haven't met
with him yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you expect to?
JOHN KERRY: I do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the one
or two things
that you wish you had known in
the very beginning
that you only learned later and
maybe painfully?
JOHN KERRY: What troubles me a
little bit
is that people are not
separating a remarkable
transformation that is taking
place globally
naturally from things that we're
really responsible
for.
Let me give you an example, Arab
Spring.
We didn't start the Arab Spring.
We couldn't have stopped the
Arab Spring,
particularly with respect to
Syria.
And I think there are some
things that might
have been able to have been
done.
But that had nothing to do with
the red line.
And let's make that absolutely
clear, folks.
President Obama never retreated
from his red
line.
He never changed his mind about
his readiness
to bomb Assad to make it clear,
you don't
use chemical weapons, never.
There's a mythology that's grown
up around
this.
One of the greatest challenges
we all face
right now, not just America, but
every country
in the world, is, we are living
in a factless
political environment.
And every country in the world
better stop
and start worrying about
authoritarian populism
and the absence of substance in
our dialogue,
if you call it that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What can the U.S.
do about
that?
JOHN KERRY: Well, we're going to
have to fight
for it.
I think a lot of people are
struggling with
the, what do you do about it?
If policy is going to be made in
140 characters
on Twitter, and every reasonable
measurement
of accountability is being
bypassed, and people
don't care about it, we have a
problem.
And it's not just our problem
here in the
United States.
It's all over the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary Kerry
also called
for a new Marshall Plan to help
countries
in critical regions around the
world educate
their exploding youth
populations and prevent
them from being radicalized.
On Sunday, one of the founders
of the Islamic
Revolution in Iran died at age
82.
Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani
helped to lead
the 1979 uprising, and went on
to serve both
as the powerful speaker of the
parliament
and as Iran's president in the
1980s.
He was also a mentor of their
current president,
Hassan Rouhani, who will be up
for reelection
this May.
Joining me now to discuss
Rafsanjani, his
influence and Iran going forward
is Karim
Sadjadpour.
He's a senior fellow at the
Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.
Karim, thank you for being back
with us.
KARIM SADJADPOUR, Carnegie
Endowment For International
Peace: Thank you.
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What made
Rafsanjani the influential
figure that he was?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, to
begin, he was a
close confidant of the father of
the Islamic
Revolution, Ayatollah Khomeini.
And I think what was unique
about Rafsanjani
was that he was always the
cleric in Iran
who was interested in putting
the country's
interests, namely, its economic
interests,
before revolutionary ideology.
But he ultimately lost that
battle against
the current supreme leader,
Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, who always believed
that the revolutionary
ideology should come first.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as you
wrote, you have
written in the last couple of
days, he helped
to put Khamenei, the current
ayatollah, in
power, but almost immediately
started trying
to get him out of power.
It's a fascinating story.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: It really is.
I call it Shiite Shakespeare,
like a Shakespearian
epic, because he was the
kingmaker.
He made Khamenei supreme leader
in 1989, thinking
that he could -- he would be
weak and pliant
and Rafsanjani could control
him.
And I think he spent the last
three decades
of his life trying to wrestle
power back from
Khomeini, unsuccessfully.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They were two
very different
men, weren't they?
Why was one successful and the
other one wasn't
ultimately?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, I think,
ultimately,
what was -- what made Khamenei
successful
is, I think he understood an
important Machiavellian
rule, which is, in authoritarian
regimes,
it's much more important to be
feared than
to be loved.
So, Khamenei very carefully over
the last
couple decades had cultivated
the military,
the Revolutionary Guard, and so
that was deeply
helpful to him.
At the same time, whereas
Khamenei had a reputation
for being financially clean,
Rafsanjani and
his family had a terrible
reputation of being
economically corrupt, which
provoked a lot
of popular resentment against
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Resentment, and
yet you're
telling us his death means a
great deal for
Iran.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, yes, he
was one of
the pillars, the last two
remaining pillars
of the 1979 revolution who
played a very important
role as a mentor to the younger
generation
of technocrats, and, as you
mentioned, President
Hassan Rouhani.
And he was kind of a
counterweight against
more radical forces in Iran.
I think that obituary writers
are very confused
about Rafsanjani, because, on
one hand, he
was someone who had blood on his
hands.
He ordered the killing of
dissidents and intellectuals
within Iran.
He was implicated in terrorist
operations
overseas.
But, at the same time, in the
context of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, he was
more moderate
than his peers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that was my
next question:
How moderate was he truly?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: So, in a
Western liberal
context, he wasn't a
Jeffersonian democrat,
but in the context of Iran, as I
said, he
favored putting the country's
economic interests
before revolutionary ideology,
which meant
things that -- that he was
supportive of detente
with the United States.
He was supportive of a cordial
relationship
with Saudi Arabia.
And he differed on these issues
of revolutionary
ideology, in contrast to the
supreme leader.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think we
mentioned he was
a mentor to the current
president, President
Rouhani.
So, what does it mean now that
he's gone from
the scene?
What do you expect to see in the
months to
come?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: I think May
2017 will be
the first litmus test.
That's Iran's presidential
elections.
I think we have learned in the
United States
that predicting presidential
elections even...
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have learned
that.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: We have
learned -- even
in a democratic system is
difficult, let alone
in an opaque, authoritarian
system like Iran.
You know, I made the comparison,
I make the
comparison with Bill Clinton.
Rafsanjani was an elder
statesman of Iranian
politics.
He served as president of the
country.
But his political -- he didn't
have a political
future.
He had a prominent past.
And so I ultimately don't think
that this
is a game-changer for Iran, in
that the powers
that be currently, the supreme
leader, the
Revolutionary Guards, are going
to remain
the main powers that be.
But, you know, an influential
counterweight
against them has now been
removed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karim Sadjadpour,
thank you
very much.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what to expect
from President Obama's farewell
address; and
using art to boost math skills.
But first: As president, Mr.
Obama made a
pledge to shine a light on mass
incarceration
and criminal justice issues.
Among other things, he has used
his executive
power to grant clemency to more
people than
any other president in modern
history.
As part of our series The Obama
Years, the
"NewsHour"'s Hari Sreenivasan
begins our coverage.
NORMAN BROWN, Released Prisoner:
"Dear Norman,
I wanted to personally inform
you that I will
be granting your application for
commutation."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Norman Brown
is reading
the letter from President Obama
that gave
him his life back.
For 24.5 years, he was in
federal prison for
selling drugs in Washington,
D.C., specifically
six counts of distributing
cocaine.
It was his third strike, and
that meant life
without parole.
NORMAN BROWN: I never thought
that I would
get no more than maybe 15 years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While he was
in prison,
his parents, his grandmother,
his brother
all died, his children grew up,
and the men
sentenced with him were
released.
NORMAN BROWN: I wanted to get
out to prove
to people that I had a monster
sentence, but
I wasn't a monster.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Brown took
classes, taught
others, earned certificates for
trade skills
and was a model prisoner.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It is my strong belief that, by
exercising
these presidential powers, I
have the chance
to show people what a second
chance can look
like.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The president
explained
his motivation this year at a
lunch with clemency
recipients, including Brown.
In 2014, Mr. Obama began a
large-scale clemency
project, reducing the sentences
of mostly
nonviolent drug offenders, after
his administration's
efforts to overhaul the criminal
justice system
failed in Congress the previous
year.
NORMAN BROWN: And being an
example for you
all is a part of my duty.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Brown has been
out for a
year now.
He mentors kids in the juvenile
justice system
as a volunteer for the
Washington Department
of Youth Rehabilitation Services
and helps
former prisoners like him
reenter society.
NORMAN BROWN: It's about growing
up.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Steve
Wasserman of the National
Association of Assistant U.S.
Attorneys defends
the strict sentencing guidelines
that put
people like Brown behind bars
for so long.
STEVEN WASSERMAN, National
Association of
Assistant U.S. Attorneys: When
you look at
recidivism rates in this
country, they range
anywhere from 50 to 75 percent.
The statistics would indicate
that a large
number of them will reoffend.
And they will reoffend in a
variety of different
ways, which will victimize
people, the public.
And that's where our core
concern is.
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama has received
more than 35,000 petitions for
clemency in
the past eight years.
He's granted 1,324; 1,176 of
those are commutations
that simply shorten a sentence;
148 are presidential
pardons, which forgive a
person's conviction
and reinstate civil liberties,
like voting.
There are still 12,000
commutation petitions
awaiting a decision before the
end of Obama's
term.
Darren Perkins (ph) has filed
for one.
In 1993, he was sentenced to
life without
parole on conspiracy charges for
distribution
of crack cocaine in Washington,
D.C.
Mandatory guidelines in effect
at the time
made it difficult to sentence
him with anything
less than life in prison without
parole.
Perkins' family still lives in
the same D.C.
neighborhood and has stood by
him for the
almost 26 years that he's been
locked up.
His youngest child, Brandi
Patterson, was
born after Perkins'
incarceration.
BRANDI PATTERSON, Daughter of
Inmate: My dad's
been in jail for 26 years.
I think that he's definitely
served his debt.
He's paid his debt to society.
And he wasn't able to see his
children grow.
And I feel like the little bit
of time that
he does have left with us, that
he should
be able to experience it
physically.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Perkins'
eldest son, Delonte
Simon, knows his father was far
from perfect,
but wonders what life would be
like if his
arrest never happened.
DELONTE SIMON, Son of Inmate: Me
and Brandi
talked about, if our father was
out, how would
we be or how would things be
with our family?
Would we be the same people?
Would our family be as strong as
it is now?
What, we don't know.
But, at the end of the day,
everything happens
for a reason.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even the judge
who sentenced
him to life sent a letter to the
president
saying he would have imposed a
shorter sentence
if the law had allowed it.
Perkins told the "NewsHour" in
an e-mail from
prison that he will continue to
fight for
his freedom, but is unsure what
a Trump administration
will mean for his future.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: I am the
law and order candidate.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
President-elect Trump has
been silent on his plans for
clemency, but
his pick for attorney general,
Senator Jeff
Sessions, made it clear in a
2014 press release
that the current administration
has overstepped.
Sessions called the president's
sentencing
reform efforts -- quote -- "a
thumb in the
eye of law enforcement officers,
prosecutors,
defense attorneys, judges, court
and prison
personnel."
Wasserman says the reason why
President Obama
is granting massive amounts of
clemency are
the major problem.
STEVEN WASSERMAN: He's granting
essentially
mass commutations simply because
he disagrees
with the law as duly passed by
Congress.
And we believe that that is an
historical
break from previous presidents'
exercise of
that power.
HARI SREENIVASAN: While Perkins
and his family
wait and hope to receive a
letter from the
president...
NORMAN BROWN: "I am granting
your application
because you have demonstrated
the potential
to turn your life around."
HARI SREENIVASAN: ... Norman
Brown knows the
responsibility that comes with
it.
Even the president in his letter
tells you
people are going to doubt you,
whether you
are reformed, whether you can
live a clean,
good life.
I mean, it's a challenge.
NORMAN BROWN: Yes.
And I wouldn't want to let him
down.
I wouldn't want to let --
because to let him
down means that the process of
clemency doesn't
work.
And I say that because of the
fact that, if
we are not given a second
chance, that means
a lot of us who have talents
that society
can use will just dry-rot in
jail.
And society needs what we have
to offer.
Yes, we made a mistake, but who
hasn't?
"So, good luck.
Godspeed.
Sincerely yours, President
Obama."
HARI SREENIVASAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
Hari Sreenivasan, Waldorf,
Maryland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in addition
to the president's
record on executive clemency, we
wanted to
take a broader look at his
overall record
on criminal justice reform.
William Brangham has that look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Obama often points
out that the U.S. is 5 percent
of the world's
population, but has over 20
percent of the
world's prisoners.
His administration has tried
various initiatives
to change that reality.
But how successful has that
effort been?
I'm joined now by Wesley Lowery.
He's a reporter for The
Washington Post who
won a Pulitzer Prize for his
work on policing,
and he's the author of the book
"They Can't
Kill Us All."
And I'm joined by Bill McCollum.
He's a former congressman from
Florida and
former attorney general of the
state.
He's now a lawyer in private
practice.
Welcome, gentlemen, to you both.
Wesley Lowery, I would like to
start with
you.
One of the things that is one of
the most
dramatic efforts that the Obama
administration
has made is the Department of
Justice intervening
in local police departments to
try to stamp
out what they see as abuses
there.
This has happened in almost two
dozen police
departments around the country.
Broadly speaking, can you tell
us, what are
they trying to do, and how
successful has
that effort been?
WESLEY LOWERY, The Washington
Post: What we
see in these cases has been a
very aggressive
Civil Rights Division of the
Department of
Justice.
And so what they would do in a
case like Ferguson
or Baltimore is send federal
investigators
to that town, to that city to
conduct investigations.
They would request reams of
data.
They would dig through internal
documents.
And what they were essentially
doing is preparing
a prosecution document, these
reports that
you would see, in which the
Department of
Justice would lay out their case
for litigation.
They would argue that a police
department
is violating the civil rights of
its residents,
whether it be through traffic
stops or through
use of force.
And it would lay those things
out, essentially
with the threat to sue the city
and sue the
department.
In order to prevent that
lawsuit, many of
these departments and these
cities would enter
what are called federal consent
decrees, and
so -- in which the city and
department agree
to a certain set of reforms and
agree to some
type of federal monitoring for a
period of
time, something the Obama
administration has
used very aggressively in order
to try to
force change to departments that
otherwise
might not have seen it, because
what we have
to remember is, the federal
government actually
has very little power over local
police departments,
based on kind of our system of
government.
Policing is a small government,
local issue.
This is one of the few ways that
the federal
government can actually make the
police in
your town or your city behave
differently.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Bill McCollum,
I wonder
what your take on that is.
What is your sense of how the
Obama administration
has handled its efforts to
reform police in
the country?
BILL MCCOLLUM, Former Florida
Attorney General:
Well, I don't think, first of
all, that the
need of reform of police is very
strong.
But they have gone into a few
communities.
I don't doubt that, out of the
thousands of
local police and sheriff's
departments, there
are some that need some kind of
attention.
But the biggest problem I see
with the Obama
administration's approach is
that it's all
civil rights-focused.
It doesn't recognize the fact
that the police
overall do a terrific job and
need more support.
Their morale is at an all-time
low today around
the country as a result of,
frankly, the president's
lack of leadership or his
misdirection in
that leadership in the face of
some very serious
incidents that I think did need
some attention.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Wesley Lowery,
in defending
his own record, the president
this weekend
cited that we have seen
historically low levels
of crime during his presidency.
Can the president take credit
for that?
He is taking credit for it, but
is that a
legitimate thing to claim?
WESLEY LOWERY: You know, it is
certainly accurate
and true that we are seeing some
of the lowest
levels of crime in the history
of the United
States of America.
The Obama years are some of the
most peaceful
years in American history as it
relates to
crime.
I think New York City just had
the least violent
year in its modern recorded
history.
Now, that means very little to a
family living
in West Englewood, Chicago,
right, or in Englewood,
or in many of the neighborhoods
in Baltimore
and even here in D.C.
And so we have -- what we have
certainly seen
is that the majority of the
country has become
safer, and yet the places that
are dangerous
have become more dangerous.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Bill, one of
the other things
that President Obama has taken
great effort
at is trying to reduce what he
believes is
an epidemic of mass
incarceration.
He has signed laws that would
reduce mandatory
minimum sentences, change these
sentencing
guidelines for crack cocaine vs.
powdered
cocaine.
What do you make of that effort
over the past
eight years?
BILL MCCOLLUM: Well, I think
he's right to
try to reduce the differences
between crack
and powder cocaine.
I don't have a problem with
granting clemency
on a case-by-case basis.
As attorney general of Florida,
that's something
that I did.
I was part of the clemency board
that met
every month.
But I do believe in minimum
mandatory sentences.
I do believe in deterrence that
is going to
come out of a determinate
sentencing.
When I was on the Crime
Subcommittee in Congress
several years ago, we didn't
have that.
And instead, we had judges that
were widely
varied in the kind of sentencing
that they
did.
And the messaging was terrible.
And one of the reasons that we
do have this
lower crime rate today is
because we have
locked up a lot of the bad guys
for long sentences,
and we have seen fewer of them
out on the
street to commit those crimes.
I fear that we're going back
into a new cycle,
where everybody is saying, hey,
let's turn
everybody out, and you haven't
rehabilitated
anybody in prison.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Wes Lowery,
obviously, we're
coming to the end of the Obama
administration.
And the Trump administration has
signaled
at least in several of his
potential appointees
a different tide.
What do you think we're likely
to see in this
next administration?
WESLEY LOWERY: Well, I certainly
think we're
going to see a very different
tenor and tone
from the administration.
We have already begun to see
this in terms
of how many of these issues are
framed, right?
So while, for example, President
Obama or
Eric Holder was much more likely
to be talking
about something such as a police
shooting
or community distrust,
president-elect Trump
and his incoming attorney
general, Jeff Sessions,
have shown they are much more
likely to talk
about things such as supporting
police officers,
so-called war on police, and the
idea of,
you know, ridding things of
violent crime.
I think very often, in our
partisan political
lens, we talk about either one
of those things
or the other one of those
things, when, in
reality, most police chiefs who
you talk to
will note that both of those
things are things
that deteriorate the
relationships between
police and communities.
Right?
In the Trump administration, it
is going to
be fascinating to see what the
posture of
the DOJ is towards these issues,
not just
policing, but criminal justice
broadly.
In Jeff Sessions, you have an
attorney general
who is one of the people who on
the Hill has
prevented the criminal justice
reform package
that has been proposed by a
bipartisan set
of senators and congressmen from
happening.
And so it is going to be very
interesting
to see what, if any federal
leadership on
-- in terms of either walking
back mandatory
minimums, which has been a major
focus of
the Obama administration, issues
of clemency,
and then also issues of kind of
data collection.
It is going to be very
interesting to see
what, if at all is pursued by
the Trump administration
in those spaces.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Bill McCollum,
last to you.
What do you think the Trump
administration
will do in this regard?
BILL MCCOLLUM: Well, I like to
think they
are going to return to the
policies that the
Reagan and Bush administrations
of the '80s
and early '90s did.
And that was to look at examples
like Boston's
policing, where they did
community policing,
and take examples and say, look
to local governments,
here's some money, federal
money.
Go do it, like the police block
grants that
were given out years ago, not
without some
strings, but basically saying,
we want you
cops back out on the streets,
walking those
beats, instead of being afraid
to do your
job, which they are today.
And I would like to see and
believe that they're
going to also focus on the black
community
and the Hispanic community and
the minorities.
That's where I think
president-elect Trump
has said he's going to do
things.
And the best thing he can do is
to address
the black-on-black crime,
Hispanic-upon-Hispanic
crime, the gangs that are there,
to try to
prevent the crime in the first
place and deter
it, and then, of course,
arresting those who
really are the ones that are
making the trouble.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Bill McCollum,
Wesley Lowery, thank you both
very much.
WESLEY LOWERY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
will deliver
his farewell address to the
nation this evening
before a room full of supporters
in Chicago.
We discuss a little of the Obama
legacy and
look ahead to tonight's speech
with two historians,
"NewsHour" regular Michael
Beschloss, and
Annette Gordon-Reed of Harvard
University.
And we welcome both of you back
to the "NewsHour."
Michael, let me start with you.
How often do presidents give
farewell addresses?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, Presidential
Historian:
Well, George Washington began
the tradition,
but it's really been more a
thing of modern
times begun by Harry Truman, who
did one from
the Oval Office when he retired
in 1953.
But they don't always work.
The ones that really work are
when you have
the sense that the president is
sort of leveling
with you in a way that perhaps
he wasn't able
to during his four or eight
years in office.
So, he's saying something that
you haven't
heard before with new candor.
And the other thing is that when
he says something
that sounds as if it's a lesson
he's learned
that perhaps he didn't know
before.
The best example of this,
Eisenhower in 1961,
said, worry about the military
industrial
complex.
It was something that he had
been increasingly
worried about for a long time,
but this was
the first time he said it to the
public.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Annette
Gordon-Reed, of course,
it's speculation, but why do you
think President
Obama wants to do this?
ANNETTE GORDON-REED, Harvard
University Law
School: Well, he's in an
interesting position.
The election didn't turn out the
way he probably
thought it was going to turn
out.
This is a chance to cement his
legacy and
talk about the kinds of things
that he wanted
to do as president.
And he is facing a situation
where people
might try to undo a good amount
of that.
So, I think this is a good way
for him to
sort of lay a template, perhaps,
for historians
later on, even though that's
almost an impossible
thing to do.
But I think it's a way for him
to talk about
his legacy, to sort of say to
the American
people what was important to
him, what he
thinks he accomplished as
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Michael,
there is some
reporting over the last few days
that the
president may be rethinking how
he wants to
spend his post-presidency, given
the outcome
of the election.
Could this be part of that?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Might very
well be.
He might spend a lot more time
replying and
criticizing things that Donald
Trump may be
doing as president.
And if that's true, he's got to
have some
kind of foreshadowing of that in
this speech
tonight.
One thing everyone will be
wondering is, what
is his current thinking about
Trump?
Right after the election, he
seemed quite
moderate about it, hoping
perhaps to coax
Donald Trump to make more
moderate appointments
and more moderate policies than
he was expecting
to.
But that's all over now.
So, if Barack Obama gets through
this speech
and there's not some, you know,
genuine statement
from him saying, you know, the
country has
to worry a little bit about what
the new president
is doing and, you know, perhaps
think about
a different direction, then I
think we may
not feel that he's really
leveling with us
in the way that other presidents
have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Annette
Gordon-Reed, the White
House did release just a small
portion of
what the president is going to
say.
It's basically he's saying -- he
talks about
the beauty of democracy and the
experiment
itself, government.
He said, "This is a great gift
our founders
gave us, the freedom to chase
our individual
dreams through our sweat, toil
and imagination."
But is Michael right, he's going
to need to
say more than that about what
he's got in
mind for the future, or else
people may be
disappointed?
ANNETTE GORDON-REED: Well, I
think we're in
unchartered waters here.
We have a president who has
never held office
before.
This is one of the things that
was apparently
one of his attractions to
people.
We don't know what to expect.
And so I think Michael is right.
We really do expect to have him
say something
that indicates what kind of role
he's going
to play after he leaves office,
because we're
in an unprecedented era, and the
president
has to be different perhaps.
The post-presidency has to be
different, not
just matter of a person getting
their library
together or whatever.
When he's talking about the
experiment, the
American experiment, the
question is, how
does it continue in this
particular moment?
And so I expect he will say
something like
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael, is there
-- I mean,
looking at what presidents have
done through
history, post-presidency, have
their actions
been affected by the outcome of
the election?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: They sure
have.
I mean, Eisenhower said that,
when Kennedy
defeated his vice president,
Nixon, he felt
as if he had been hit in the
solar plexus
by a baseball bat.
And so I think, in Barack
Obama's case, if
we hear him tonight not saying
essentially
I didn't expect to finish my
presidency giving
this office over to a successor
who wants
to destroy much of what I have
tried to do
and who is in many ways almost
the opposite
of me, if he just sort of plays
cool, as if
sort of he's unruffled by that,
the best Obama
speeches have been -- and this
is true of
most presidents -- when you
really feel that
you are hearing his inner
monologue.
If this is too rhetorical, if
he's trying
too hard to imitate, let's say,
George Washington's
farewell address, this will not
be a success
tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Annette
Gordon-Reed, how much
have presidents in the past have
been able
to sort of, I don't want to say
tinker with
their legacy, but, say, shape
their legacy
post-presidency?
I'm thinking about Jimmy Carter,
but I -- but
there are other examples.
ANNETTE GORDON-REED: Well, Jimmy
Carter has
done a wonderful job with his
legacy and sort
of changing what people think
about him in
his post-presidential years.
But, for the most part, it's
very difficult
to set your legacy, because
every generation
of people asks different
questions and is
concerned about different
things.
So, a president could say, oh,
this is what
I want people to focus on, but
other generations
aren't really as concerned about
that.
So, it's -- you know, it's a
gamble.
They do the best they can do,
but historians
are going to do what they're
going to do and
write what they're going to
write based upon
the needs of their particular
generation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Michael?
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: Annette is
absolutely right.
We cannot be spun, or at least
we'd like to
think that we cannot be.
And the presidents who are
trying to -- too
overtly to try to say, here is
what you historians
and what you later Americans
should think
of my presidency, 30 or 40 years
later, they
look silly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally,
Annette, the fact
that he's doing it in front of
an audience
of supporters, we have not
always -- we have
not seen many presidential
speeches in that
form, have we?
ANNETTE GORDON-REED: No, we have
not.
But this is a special moment,
and he's in
a special place, the place where
he began
his life as a public servant.
And so it's fitting that he
would be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Annette
Gordon-Reed, thank
you very much.
Michael Beschloss, we thank you
both.
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS: We will be
listening.
ANNETTE GORDON-REED: Glad to be
here.
Yes, we will be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we want to
add that, before
the president's address tonight,
we hope you
will head to our Web site, where
we have put
together some of the most
memorable moments
from President Obama's speeches
over the years.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: using the power and appeal
of the arts
to boost low-performing schools.
Arts frequently get cut from
school curricula
due to money and time, but a
pilot program
around the country is trying to
use music,
performance and other arts in
dozens of schools
to motivate kids.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
It's part of our weekly series
on Making the
Grade.
JEFFREY BROWN: Making music and
using the
arts to build math and other
skills, that's
the theory here at the ReNEW
Cultural Arts
Academy, a public charter school
in New Orleans,
not long ago, one of the lowest
performing
schools in Louisiana, a state
ranking near
the bottom in the nation.
It's a school now showing
measurable signs
of educational advancement.
Why does the singing help you do
math?
STUDENT: Because, at my old
school, when we
didn't have any songs for
multiplication,
we -- like, half my class used
to get, like,
unsatisfactories, because they
didn't remember
it for multiplication.
But now that I'm at this school,
and I'm singing
songs, I can memorize it more.
JEFFREY BROWN: A floor above, an
eighth grade
social studies class uses the
musical "Hamilton"
to make history come alive.
Teacher Areonne Howard:
AREONNE HOWARD, Teacher, ReNEW
Cultural Arts
Academy: I'm obsessed with
"Hamilton," and
so the rap battles were just a
perfect way
to bring them into what a debate
actually
is and how to do it.
It triggers their listening
skills, too, and
their writing skills, because
they're going
to have to write their own, and
so that we
provided a model for them, but
they love it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Samantha King
works for KID
smART, a consulting company
that's helped
craft the curriculum here and at
other schools.
SAMANTHA KING, KID smART: The
general idea
of arts integration is to appeal
to different
modalities of children's
learning.
So they get to get up and use
perhaps skills
and things that they love or are
drawn to,
theater, dance, visual arts,
music.
And we find that, when you put
both things
together, it sticks.
I mean, they remember things.
It's in their body memory.
JEFFREY BROWN: Kathy Fletcher is
national
director of Turnaround Arts.
KATHY FLETCHER, National
Director, Turnaround
Arts: The idea is really simple,
and it is
that the arts in education can
be used not
just as a flower, something to
do after math
and science scores are up, but
actually as
a reform strategy, something
that really can
help to reach and teach and
engage children.
JEFFREY BROWN: Turnaround Arts
is a 5-year-old
program created by the
President's Committee
on the Arts and Humanities.
It's the first federal effort to
use arts
education as a tool to boost
achievement in
the nation's lowest performing
schools.
Seventy percent of its funding
comes from
foundations and the private
sector.
Turnaround began in eight
schools around the
country.
The number recently rose to 68
in 15 states
and the District of Columbia.
KATHY FLETCHER: In the decades
past, the first
thing to get cut when budgets
are going are
the arts.
And I think a lot of people
thought that families
would get their own art lessons
and dance
classes.
And there's about six million
kids in this
country who are in public
schools, charter
schools, who don't have those
opportunities,
so they don't get any arts in
school.
And to have something that
positive and that
joyful to kick-start literacy
and a lot of
the other core content subjects,
it just seems
like a smart way to teach.
JEFFREY BROWN: That strikes a
personal chord
in the Turnaround artists,
accomplished professionals
who volunteer their time to work
with students
and teachers.
At ReNEW Dolores T. Aaron
Academy, we watched
actress Alfre Woodard, singer
Graham Nash
and our own David Brooks, The
New York Times
columnist, in action.
ALFRE WOODARD, Actress: So, let
me hear the
sound it makes.
Ah.
Never hold sound in.
STUDENT: I have been watching
the news.
DAVID BROOKS: And just remember
to take your
time.
You're going to want to, like,
rush through
because you will be a little
nervous.
But if you can stop and breathe,
it will seem
long to you, but it will seem
great to everybody
else.
GRAHAM NASH, Musician: Can you
feel the vibrations
in the guitar?
Listen, put your hands on the
body.
JEFFREY BROWN: Woodard, known
for award-winning
film, stage and television
roles, is a veteran
of the program.
Why is this work important?
ALFRE WOODARD: Somebody showed
up for both
of us.
That's why we're here.
Art completes not only the
education, but
it completes the human being,
our ability
to create, and to express that
creation.
And we also have all the visuals
now of channels
in your brain opening up when
you're doing
a particular discipline.
So, once we had that, we wanted
to come into
schools, put it to the test.
GRAHAM NASH: You know, this
particular school,
it was one of their very first
projects.
And when they first came here,
the windows
were blacked out and the
skylight was blocked
off and the rats were running
along the top
of the wall.
And now look at it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Graham Nash of
Crosby, Stills,
Nash and Young is a two-time
Rock and Roll
Hall of Fame inductee, but never
forgets his
bleak childhood in post-World
War II England.
GRAHAM NASH: I like to go into a
thing not
knowing exactly what's going on,
but I will
turn that, then I will deal with
whatever
it is.
Right?
So, one of the kids comes up to
me, and he
goes, you know, Mr. Nash, we
have rewritten
your song "Chicago," and here it
is.
And we're going to teach it to
you.
(singing): Won't you please come
to New Orleans
just to dance?
I went, OK, let's go, you know,
because you
can either stop it right there
and say, look,
you can't rewrite my song, blah,
blah, blah,
or you can just go with it and
see what happens.
And when you choose that moment,
that's when
the world opens up and all kinds
of opportunities
come your way.
JEFFREY BROWN: An independent
evaluation of
the original eight Turnaround
schools conducted
showed early success.
Half the schools improved their
attendance
rates.
The average improvement in math
proficiency
was 22 percent and reading close
to 13 percent.
And discipline problems fell.
At ReNEW Cultural Arts Academy,
for example,
suspensions were down 51
percent.
And the kids themselves?
New Orleans ninth grader Jared
Mullens has
seen his own turnaround through
the arts.
JARED MULLENS, Student: I will
be thinking,
what more can I achieve in life,
instead of
just stopping at this point?
When I'm in the arts, I'm
focused.
JEFFREY BROWN: Last spring, he
found himself
at the White House singing for
first lady
Michelle Obama, an early backer
of Turnaround
Arts.
Months later, in New Orleans, he
sang to a
packed crowd of a different
sort, a high school
gymnasium filled with students,
teachers,
parents and Turnaround artists.
Turnaround Arts will expand to
20 more schools
next fall.
And in a step to ensure its
future, the John
F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts
in Washington will help manage
and host the
program.
From New Orleans, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight on
PBS, "American
Experience" presents a film
about an accident
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight on
PBS, "American
Experience" presents a film
about an accident
in an Arkansas missile silo that
almost led
to terrifying consequences.
"Command and Control" details
the 1980 story
of maintenance workers who
dropped a wrench
socket, causing a hole in the
fuel tank, and
the heroic efforts to prevent
the nuclear
warhead from exploding.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, we remember
the life of British journalist
Clare Hollingworth,
who broke the story of the start
of World
War II.
Read about her life as a war
correspondent.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
now, but rejoin
us right here at 9:00 p.m.
Eastern for special
coverage of President Obama's
farewell address
to the nation.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online, and again right
here later
tonight.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.